blog: add an article about the 2023-07-07 outage (#6532)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2023/07/10/2023-07-12-jenkins-mirrors-postmortem-outage.adoc

links:
discourse: true
---

Friday 07th of July 2023, the Jenkins infrastructure suffered a major outage from 11:05am UTC until 15:25pm UTC with:

* Complete downtime of the following services:
** accounts.jenkins.io
** fallback.get.jenkins.io
** get.jenkins.io
** incrementals.jenkins.io
** javadoc.jenkins.io
** plugin-health.jenkins.io
** plugin-site-issues.jenkins.io
** plugins.origin.jenkins.io
** plugins.jenkins.io
** rating.jenkins.io
** repo.azure.jenkins.io
** reports.jenkins.io
** stories.jenkins.io
** uplink.jenkins.io
** weekly.ci.jenkins.io
** www.origin.jenkins.io

[IMPORTANT]
--
The public IPs of these services changed (DNS records included) to:

* `20.7.178.24` (IPv4)
* `2603:1030:408:5::15a` (IPv6)

⚠️ Update your corporate networks (DNS, proxies, firewall) if you need to access these services.
--

* Complete downtime of the following non-public services:
** ldap.jenkins.io
** previews of *.jenkins.io pull requests (infra.ci.jenkins.io)

* Disruption (partial or complete) of the following services:
** ci.jenkins.io
** infra.ci.jenkins.io
** issues.jenkins.io
** plugins.jenkins.io
** repo.jenkins-ci.org
** www.jenkins.io

== Incident Timeline

> * **10:30am UTC:** after a successful upgrade of the public Kubernetes cluster in Azure to 1.25 (as part of https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582[]), we realized that the LDAP service was not reachable by the services running inside the cluster (such as accounts.jenkins.io).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **10:30am UTC:** After a successful upgrade of the public Kubernetes cluster in Azure to 1.25 (as part of https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582[]), we realized that the LDAP service was not reachable by the services running inside the cluster (such as accounts.jenkins.io).
```
capitalization for beginning of sentence

> We quickly realize that the IP restrictions were blocking these requests as the pod originating IP was in a different range than i t was before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We quickly realized that the IP restrictions were blocking these requests as the pod originating IP was in a different range than it was before.
```
past tense usage and fixing kerning

> * **10:55am UTC:** The fix https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure/pull/431 is deployed to specify a proper set of IP ranges for the pods. It removed all of the node pools (e.g. all the virtual machines where the container were running) and failed to re-create them causing a full outage of all the services running in this cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **10:55am UTC:** The fix https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure/pull/431 is deployed to specify a proper set of IP ranges for the pods.
It removed all of the node pools (all the virtual machines where the container was running) and failed to re-create them, causing a full outage of all the services running in this cluster:
```
small formatting and syntax  suggestion

** accounts.jenkins.io
** get.jenkins.io
** incrementals.jenkins.io
** javadoc.jenkins.io
** jenkins-wiki-exporter.jenkins.io
** ldap.jenkins.io
** plugins.jenkins.io
** previews of *.jenkins.io pull requests (infra.ci.jenkins.io)
** release.ci.jenkins.io
** repo.azure.jenkins.io
** reports.jenkins.io
** stories.jenkins.io
** uplink.jenkins.io
** www.jenkins.io

> * **11:16am until 13:16pm UTC:** The failure to re-create resources led us to spend the 2 next hours in creating the cluster from scratch with a fixed network setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **11:16am until 13:16pm UTC:** The failure to re-create resources led us to spend the 2 next hours creating the cluster from scratch with a fixed network setup.
```
small syntax suggestion

* **15:17pm UTC:** https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure/pull/432 is pushed to persist the manual work we did to recreate the cluster including the IP setup.

> * **15:25pm UTC:** all services are back to normal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **15:25pm UTC:** All services are back to normal
```
capitalization suggestion

== What Happened?

> * When the cluster was initially created, we selected the virtual network's IP range `10.**244**.0.0/**16**` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L66) with a sub-network `10.245.0.0/24` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L161)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the cluster was initially created, we selected the virtual network's IP range `10.**244**.0.0/**16**` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L66) with a sub-network `10.245.0.0/24` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L161).
```
punctuation suggestion

> * But we ignored that the range `10.**244**.0.0/**24**` is the default CIDR for the Kubernetes Pods network in Azure when using the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/configure-kubenet["kubenet" network to support IPv6 instead of default CNI]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* But we ignored that the range `10.**244**.0.0/**24**` is the default CIDR for the Kubernetes Pods network in Azure when using the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/configure-kubenet["kubenet" network to support IPv6 instead of default CNI].
```
punctuation suggestion

> * The node pool re-creation failed because we assumed both ranges were able to communicate and tried to deploy and invalid setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The node pool re-creation failed because we assumed both ranges were able to communicate and tried to deploy an invalid setup.
```
Potential suggestion for syntax, not sure if this is the intended message. If my suggestion is incorrect, please disregard!

> * As soon as we specified a custom Pod CIDR in a distinct range, everything went fine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As soon as we specified a custom Pod CIDR in a distinct range, everything went fine.
```
punctuation suggestion

> * Also, when the original cluster was deleted, it transitively removed the current Public IPs as it removed the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/faq#why-are-two-resource-groups-created-with-aks[Nodes Resource Group] containing the Public IP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the original cluster was deleted it transitively removed the current Public IPs, as it removed the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/faq#why-are-two-resource-groups-created-with-aks[Nodes Resource Group] containing the Public IP.
```
suggestion for punctuation/wording

> ** These public IPs should change as less as possible to avoid problems with our users running behind a corporate firewall with an allow-list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** These public IPs should change as little as possible to avoid problems with our users running behind a corporate firewall with an allow-list.
```
suggestion for syntax

== What can we do to improve?

* As per link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582#issuecomment-1629210833[Our initial assesment]: protect the Public IPs from deletion by adding a https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/lock-resources?tabs=json[Management Lock]

* As link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582#issuecomment-1629752851[recommended by other contributors]: storing the Public IP in a distinct Resource Group and set up the Kubernetes-managed Load Balancers accordingly (annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/azure-load-balancer-resource-group`)

* Improve our network diagrams and documentation to have a better access to the representation and potential overlaps when preparing operations

> * Avoid changing AKS node pools configurations all at once: we would have caught the issue after the first node pool and could have avoided a full outage (we are working on this topic for the `arm64` node pools in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3623[])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Avoid changing AKS node pools configurations all at once: we would have caught the issue after the first node pool and could have avoided a full outage (we are working on this topic for the `arm64` node pools in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3623[PR-3623]).
```

* plugin-health.jenkins.io
* plugin-site-issues.jenkins.io
* plugins.origin.jenkins.io
* plugins.jenkins.io
* rating.jenkins.io
* repo.azure.jenkins.io
* reports.jenkins.io
* stories.jenkins.io
* uplink.jenkins.io
* weekly.ci.jenkins.io
* www.origin.jenkins.io

We also had complete downtime of the following non-public services:

* ldap.jenkins.io
* previews of *.jenkins.io pull requests (infra.ci.jenkins.io)

In addition, there was disruption (partial or complete) of the following services:

* ci.jenkins.io
* infra.ci.jenkins.io
* issues.jenkins.io
* plugins.jenkins.io
* repo.jenkins-ci.org
* www.jenkins.io

[IMPORTANT]
--
The public IPs of these services changed (DNS records included) to:

* `20.7.178.24` (IPv4)
* `2603:1030:408:5::15a` (IPv6)

⚠️ Update your corporate networks (DNS, proxies, firewall) if you need to access these services.
--

== Incident Timeline

* **10:30am UTC:** After a successful upgrade of the public Kubernetes cluster in Azure to 1.25 (as part of https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582[help desk ticket 3582]), we realized that the LDAP service was not reachable by the services running inside the cluster (such as accounts.jenkins.io).

> We quickly realized that the IP restrictions were blocking these requests as the pod originating IP was in a different range than it was before.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We quickly noticed that the IP restrictions were blocking these requests as the pod originating IP was in a different range than it was before.
```
avoid repetition

* **10:55am UTC:** The fix (https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure/pull/431[Azure PR 431]) is deployed to specify a proper set of IP ranges for the pods.
It removed all of the node pools (all the virtual machines where the container was running) and failed to re-create them, causing a full outage of all the services running in this cluster:
** accounts.jenkins.io
** get.jenkins.io
** incrementals.jenkins.io
** javadoc.jenkins.io
** jenkins-wiki-exporter.jenkins.io
** ldap.jenkins.io
** plugins.jenkins.io
** previews of *.jenkins.io pull requests (infra.ci.jenkins.io)
** release.ci.jenkins.io
** repo.azure.jenkins.io
** reports.jenkins.io
** stories.jenkins.io
** uplink.jenkins.io
** www.jenkins.io

* **11:16am until 13:16pm UTC:** The failure to re-create resources led us to spend the 2 next hours creating the cluster from scratch with a fixed network setup.

* **15:17pm UTC:** link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure/pull/432[This pull request] is pushed to persist the manual work we did to recreate the cluster including the IP setup.

* **15:25pm UTC:** All services are back to normal

== What Happened?

> * When the cluster was initially created, we selected the virtual network's IP range `10.**244**.0.0/**16**` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L66[Azure VNets]) with a sub-network `10.245.0.0/24` (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L161)[Azure subnet]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When the cluster was initially created, we selected the `10.**244**.0.0/**16**` virtual network IP range (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L66[Azure VNets]) with a `10.245.0.0/24` sub-network (ref. https://github.com/jenkins-infra/azure-net/blob/fcb010a5d9f164203c9a896fcb974df4051c321d/vnets.tf#L161)[Azure subnet]).
```
(nit)(?)

> * But we ignored that the range `10.**244**.0.0/**24**` is the default CIDR for the Kubernetes Pods network in Azure when using the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/configure-kubenet["kubenet" network to support IPv6 instead of default CNI].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* But we ignored that the `10.**244**.0.0/**24**` range is the default CIDR for the Kubernetes Pods network in Azure when using the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/configure-kubenet["kubenet" network to support IPv6 instead of the default CNI].
```
(same as above)

> * The node pool re-creation failed because we assumed both ranges were able to communicate and tried to deploy an invalid setup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The node pool re-creation failed because we assumed both ranges were able to communicate, and tried to deploy an invalid setup.
```

Reviewer 2: Generally don't need a "," between left hand side and right hand side of "and"

== What can we do to improve?

* As per link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582#issuecomment-1629210833[our initial assessment]: protect the Public IPs from deletion by adding a https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/lock-resources?tabs=json[Management Lock].

* As link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3582#issuecomment-1629752851[recommended by other contributors]: storing the Public IP in a distinct Resource Group and set up the Kubernetes-managed Load Balancers accordingly (annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/azure-load-balancer-resource-group`).

* Improve our network diagrams and documentation to have better access to the representation and potential overlaps when preparing operations.

* Avoid changing AKS node pools configurations all at once: we would have caught the issue after the first node pool and could have avoided a full outage (we are working on this topic for the `arm64` node pools in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/helpdesk/issues/3623[PR-3623]).

== From 0 to production in less than 4 hours!

> One of the takeaways of this outage, is that we are able to recover from a full destruction in less than **4** hours.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the takeaways of this outage, is that we are able to recover from a full destruction of the cluster hosting almost all public services in less than **4** hours.
```
Optional suggestion.
